how would you rather go extinct
starvation Spears or syphilis
the Rapa Nui had all three
hey guys Amy with you on dnews
today it's been long thought
that the original people of
Easter Island killed themselves
off through war but new
information is suggesting
otherwise
Easter Island the 64 square mile
remote chili and territory that
lives over 2,300 miles off the
South American coast is known to
most of us as that island with a
giant heads called moai these
statues of human figures with
oversized heads were made by the
Rapa Nui the island native
polynesian inhabitants at some
point between the tenth and
sixteenth centuries but not long
after erecting the impressive
statues the Rapa Nui disappeared
and four years archaeologists
have suspected that they were
killed off by an environmental
catastrophe they brought upon
themselves the commonly held
areas that humans and what
miraculously reach the small
island more than a millennium
ago and quickly colonized it but
with these new residents also
came rats which they either
brought as a food source or
stowaways
in any case these rats thrived
on the isolated volcanic island
finding an ample food supply in
the lush palm trees and with no
risk of starvation the
population quickly swelled to a
few million the rats ate the
vegetation faster than it could
regrow eventually taking away
their own food supply less rat
food meant less rats and les
rats meant less food for the
humans tack on the fact that the
local people were also cutting
down vegetation for farmland and
building materials and you have
an island that is no longer
environmentally sustainable
again meaning less food for
humans
those that didn't die from
starvation went to war over the
dwindling food supply kill each
other with the many arrowheads
archaeologists have found
scattered around the island by
the time the European explorers
reached the island in 1722
there are a few natives left
those that remained were quickly
killed by Western diseases like
syphilis and smallpox the
Europeans brought with them
this theory on Easter Island
history is so prevalent that
historians use it as a
cautionary tale of the perils
that come from abusing the scant
natural resources available in a
small environment but new
research is challenging this
long-held theory
archaeologists continued field
work on the remote island now
suggests that disease and
slavery brought by Europeans
played a much larger role in
killing the Rapa Nui than their
own
environmental demise the
findings published in the
journal antiquity . to one
specific thing
do you remember when I talked
about those arrowheads the Rapa
Nui used to kill each other
well it turns out they aren't
arrowheads at all they're not
even weapons those carved
sharp-pointed pieces of obsidian
a rock made a volcanic glass are
called ma and after analyzing
423 of them a team of scientists
is now determined that the
objects aren't suited for
killing humans are more suited
to be a general purpose tool
they could have been used for
anything from cultivating the
land to ritual scarification to
tattooing as lead author on the
recent study kar lipo of the
Binghamton University in New
York explain to the BBC a weapon
would be long and thin like a
sword basically something prime
for piercing in Oregon without
having to get too close to an
enemy the points on Easter
Island are just too short and
flat
there are more reminiscent of
spades and a spear making them
tools for survival like digging
and farming
so the Rapa Nui didn't kill
themselves that shifts the blame
firmly onto the European
explorers
well rats eating the palm trees
and the Rapa Nui felling them to
clear the land and make fires
would have changed the
environment
it seems the environment
remained sustainable for century
it wasn't until the Europeans
brought diseases and enslave the
native Islanders that they were
put on the road to near
extinction
so the Rapa Nui might be gone
but at least we can rebuild
their history through rich
archaeological analysis but
analyzing pointed stones isn't
the only way scientists are
recovering lost civilizations
Julian's got the skinny on how
scientists are using lidar to
unveil lost cities lidar is like
radar except instead of using
radio waves reflected off
objects to find them
it uses lasers and as it turns
out these lasers are perfect for
penetrating dense vegetation and
if you want to keep updated on
all things science be sure to
check out test tubes newsletter
get a weekly roundup of our most
popular videos across all our
shows a test tube . com / FWD
what mysteries of ancient
civilizations would you guys
like to know more about
let us know in the comments
below and don't forget subscribe
for more dnews every day of the
week
yeah